Updating "Best practices: Naming lables" #2469 (#2549)
prometheus/docs: content/docs/practices/naming.md

  client libraries. For metrics specific to an application, the prefix is
  usually the application name itself. Sometimes, however, metrics are more
  generic, like standardized metrics exported by client libraries. Examples:
  * <code><b>prometheus</b>\_notifications\_total</code>
    (specific to the Prometheus server)
  * <code><b>process</b>\_cpu\_seconds\_total</code>
    (exported by many client libraries)
  * <code><b>http</b>\_request\_duration\_seconds</code>
    (for all HTTP requests)
* ...must have a single unit (i.e. do not mix seconds with milliseconds, or seconds with bytes).
* ...should use base units (e.g. seconds, bytes, meters - not milliseconds, megabytes, kilometers).See below for a list of base units.

> * ...should have a suffix describing the unit, in plural form. Note that an accumulating count has `total` as a suffix, in addition to the unit if applicable.Also note that this applies to units in the narrow sense (like the units in the table below), but not to countable things in general. For example, <code>connections</code> or <code>notifications</code> are not considered units for this rule and do not have to be at the end of the metric name. (See also examples in the next paragraph.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ...should have a suffix describing the unit, in plural form. Note that an accumulating count has `total` as a suffix, in addition to the unit if applicable. Also note that this applies to units in the narrow sense (like the units in the table below), but not to countable things in general. For example, <code>connections</code> or <code>notifications</code> are not considered units for this rule and do not have to be at the end of the metric name. (See also examples in the next paragraph.)
```

(Blank is missing. I'll commit this directly, no need to update the PR.)

  * <code>node\_memory\_usage\_<b>bytes</b></code>
  * <code>http\_requests\_<b>total</b></code>
    (for a unit-less accumulating count)
  * <code>process\_cpu\_<b>seconds\_total</b></code>
    (for an accumulating count with unit)
  * <code>foobar_build<b>\_info</b></code>
    (for a pseudo-metric that provides [metadata](https://www.robustperception.io/exposing-the-software-version-to-prometheus) about the running binary)
  * <code>data\_pipeline\_last\_record\_processed\_<b>timestamp_seconds</b></code>
    (for a timestamp that tracks the time of the latest record processed in a data processing pipeline)
* ...may order its name components in a way that leads to convenient grouping when a list of metric names is sorted lexicographically, as long as all the other rules are followed. The following examples have their the common name components first so that all the related metrics are sorted together:
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_closed\_total</code>
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_established\_total</code>
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_failed\_total</code>
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_total</code>

>   The following examples are also valid, but are following a different trade-off. They are easier to read individually, but unrelated metrics like <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_series</code> might get sorted in between.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    The following examples are also valid, but are following a different trade-off. They are easier to read individually, but unrelated metrics like <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_series</code> might get sorted in between.
```

I think we need a blank line here to convince markdown to end the previous list item. (I'll commit this directly, no need to change the PR.)

 * <code><b>http</b>\_request\_duration\_seconds</code>
   (for all HTTP requests)
* ...must have a single unit (i.e. do not mix seconds with milliseconds, or seconds with bytes).
* ...should use base units (e.g. seconds, bytes, meters - not milliseconds, megabytes, kilometers). Note that things like connections, notifications are not considered as base units.See below for a list of base units.

> * ...should have a suffix describing the unit, in plural form. Note that an accumulating count has `total` as a suffix, in addition to the unit if applicable.

Reviewer: This is where the note about "real" units can happen. You could append something like:

Also note that this applies to units in the narrow sense (like the units in the table below), but not to countable things in general. For example, `connections` or `notifications` are not considered units for this rule and do not have to be at the end of the metric name. (See also examples in the next paragraph.)

   (for a pseudo-metric that provides [metadata](https://www.robustperception.io/exposing-the-software-version-to-prometheus) about the running binary)
 * <code>data\_pipeline\_last\_record\_processed\_<b>timestamp_seconds</b></code>
  (for a timestamp that tracks the time of the latest record processed in a data processing pipeline)

> * ...that has a accumulating count such as `total`, but doesn't have a base unit in the name like, "<code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations</code>", then it can have the following naming scenarios. Note that the former examples would be suitable if you want to follow lexographic sorting order for the names.
>  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_total</code>
>  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_failed\_total</code>
>  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_established\_total</code>
>  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_closed\_total</code>
>   or
>  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_total</code>
>  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_failed\_truncations\_total</code>
>  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_established\_truncations\_total</code>
>  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_closed\_truncations\_total</code>

Reviewer: I would word this a bit differently. Also, the indentation of the lists has to be different to work properly. Also, the example metrics should actually be sorted lexicographically to prove the point. See suggestion below.

```suggestion
* ...may order its name components in a way that leads to convenient grouping when a list of metric names is sorted lexicographically, as long as all the other rules are followed. The following examples have their the common name components first so that all the related metrics are sorted together:
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_closed\_total</code>
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_established\_total</code>
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_failed\_total</code>
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_total</code>
  The following examples are also valid, but are following a different trade-off. They are easier to read individually, but unrelated metrics like <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_series</code> might get sorted in between.
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_closed\_truncations\_total</code>
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_established\_truncations\_total</code>
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_failed\_truncations\_total</code>
  * <code>prometheus\_tsdb\_head\_truncations\_total</code>
```

* ...should represent the same logical thing-being-measured across all label
  dimensions.

>  * request duration

Reviewer: Line 54 to 56 need to be indented by one more blank.

   (for a pseudo-metric that provides [metadata](https://www.robustperception.io/exposing-the-software-version-to-prometheus) about the running binary)
 * <code>data\_pipeline\_last\_record\_processed\_<b>timestamp_seconds</b></code>
  (for a timestamp that tracks the time of the latest record processed in a data processing pipeline)

> * ...that has a `unit` in its name, must always have that `unit` as the last word. Note that an accumulating count such as `total` will be the last word, in addition to the unit if applicable. Examples,

Reviewer 2: "Must" is probably too strong.

```suggestion
* ...that has a `unit` in its name, should have that `unit` as the last word. Note that an accumulating count such as `total` will be the last word, in addition to the unit if applicable. Examples,
```

  * <code>request\_size\_<b>bytes</b></code>
  * <code>request\_size\_<b>bytes</b>\_<b>total</b></code>
  * <code>process\_cpu\_<b>seconds</b></code>
  * <code>process\_cpu\_<b>seconds</b>\_<b>total</b></code>
* ...that has a accumulating count such as `total`, can have two different naming scenarios. 
  * If the metric name has a unit, then the unit must be the last word before the accumulating count. Examples,
    * <code>process\_cpu\_<b>seconds</b>\_<b>total</b></code>
    * <code>request\_size\_<b>bytes</b>\_<b>total</b></code>

>   * If the metric name does'nt have a real unit, then the naming can follow any sorting order in a way that it fits your use case, such as `grouping similar metric names`. Examples,

Reviewer: Typo: does'nt → doesn't

>   * If the metric name does'nt have a real unit, then the naming can follow any sorting order in a way that it fits your use case, such as `grouping similar metric names`. Examples,

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I agree with this section. The example `connections` is a real countable unit.

However, we have agreed in the past that unit modifiers are prefered to be before, but are still allowed to be after. For example, both `process_thing_failed_bytes_total` and `process_thing_bytes_failed_total` are both valid.

Author: I understand, i can try to rephrase that. 

But with regards to your overall comment, I understood that only standalone units which are measurable, like "seconds", "bytes" are considered to be a real unit. In a different context "connections" could be a unit, but it does'nt represent a unit of measurement though.

Correct me if i am wrong, ill read the discussion for this issue again to see if i can rephrase these lines.

Thanks for the feedback, will get back with this issue soon.

Reviewer: I understood the previous discussions such that we had reached the consensus that we won't consider things like `connections` a "real" unit for the sake of metric naming. (I'm not sure, though, if we should use the wording "real unit" in the doc here.) If my understanding is flawed, maybe @juliusv and @SuperQ could go back to the drawing board and find out what the consensus is.

Very generally, this document is just a recommendation anyway, so we aren't defining a spec here and maybe don't have to be super precise.

On the other hand, OpenMetrics in its current state specifies about the UNIT metadata field:

> Unit specifies MetricFamily units. If non-empty, it MUST be a suffix of the MetricFamily name separated by an underscore. Be aware that further generation rules might make it an infix in the text format.

I'm not sure if we are ever going to enforce this in Prometheus (and the strict requirement might even be lifted in OM v2), but since the OM standard was evolved from existing best practices, it gives us some hints. I would believe the following to be true:
- A "real" unit is one that would show up in the UNIT metadata field. (E.g. we would probably not have a line like `# UNIT go_sql_stats_connections_idle connections` in the OM exposition.)
- Such a "real" unit really should be the last thing before any other suffix like `_total` (in OM, it's a MUST even).

So maybe that's what should go in here: Somehow explain what "real" units are (using a better wording than just saying "real unit"), and then have a very strong recommendation to put them last.

    * If you decided to name something as "<code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn</code>", then it can have the following group names. (Note that this is only an example and you can follow your own order, if it improves your work flow)
      * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_total</code>
      * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_failed\_total</code>
      * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_established\_total</code>
      * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_closed\_total</code>
      or
      * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_total</code>
      * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_total\_failed</code>
      * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_total\_established</code>

>       * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_total\_closed</code>

Reviewer: I'm pretty sure that we _always_ want the `_total` last in a counter. So these examples should not be here.

Author: ok, I'll work on this

>       or
>       * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_total</code>
>       * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_total\_failed</code>
>       * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_total\_established</code>
>       * <code>net\_conntrack\_dialer\_conn\_total\_closed</code>

Reviewer 2: Yes, this example is invalid.

```suggestion
```

Author: Got it
